[Music]
that's the gig economy give workers new
freedoms or does it mean greater
exploitation well the the gig economy or
casual casual work where your your labor
can be turned on and off like a tap it's
it's mainly about exploitation take so
bogus self-employment like van drivers
who drive what you order online
most of those are so-called
self-employed they have no holiday pay
they have no sick pay they're allegedly
providing a service of the company they
work for if something goes wrong if they
have an accident it's their fault they
carry responsibility and I was they
carry responsibility for some of the
goods they carry they might have to pay
now for one or two quick energetic young
lads that might work quite well if
they're lucky but for a lot of people it
means working 12 hours a day it means
they're exhausted it means that they
barely have time with their families and
they're struggling together to get a
living wage another form of the gig
economies is agency work where and and
the public services know all about this
the NHS knows all about this outsourcing
the outsourcing produces casualized
labor lower pay more vulnerable workers
and a worse service and that's been the
case in the health services in all our
public services so it's about
exploitation and that's why employers
want it it is the perfect way of
employing someone for work for an
employer good you can turn them off
you're not a work tomorrow no money okay
you can come in you got half a shift
okay you can work 60 hours next week I
mean it's it's in tallien that
responsibility goes from the employer
onto the shoulders of the worker
entirely about exploitation
that's not your view is it Kay I yeah I
respectfully disagree I think Ken is
brilliant at sharing stories and
personal stories that really affect
people but the stories that I really
pick up from you can especially as from
what I know about this new film are the
struggles of people who are really
dealing with the cost of living in this
country who just have more and more red
tape actually put around them in terms
to the prices of their food the houses
that they're renting it's extremely
difficult the childcare that they're
having to get it's extremely difficult
often just to to live in this country
and that's a really important thing to
highlight but I don't think the target
should be the gig economy or zero-hours
contracts because of what people in
those jobs actually tell us and in the
most recent big survey people on
zero-hours contracts actually report to
be more satisfied in their jobs by a few
percentage points than people in
full-time work and the percentage of
people in all employment who are on
these contracts for what is considered
to be their full employment is under
three percent most people are topping up
their work to get a bit more cash
they're not fully reliant on Sarah's
contracts and you know who those people
are they're women and young people
they're women who use zero hours
contracts to feed into their flexible
working style that they need because
they often want to work life balance and
they're young people who might be aiming
to become a new film director who need
to be able to work flexibly in order to
go to any kind of gig or job interviewer
the like and I think we need to listen
to what they're actually telling us and
the feedback they're giving us and
that's before we even get to the
consumer benefit that a lot of young
people feel when they are able to say
use uber or delivery things that we
could have never accessed and don't have
the budget to access even ten years ago
so I really appreciate the stories that
you tell but I don't think you've
targeted the right area we need to be
talking about the cost of living not
throwing flexible work out the window
I actually think for many people it's
made life better in 2019 and for young
people and women in particular often
times it mean that their work more
accessible who are here in the in the
audience is working on a zero hours
contract or in the gig economy right man
they're in the thing shot you put your
hand up and then the man here in the
check shirt - yes yes I lost my job
years ago so I was foot when the company
went into liquidation so I was forced
freely into a zero hours contract I've
done it for ten years now and I would
agree I'll get more job satisfaction out
bad weeks good weeks bad months but I
think my job satisfaction is probably
more now because I've got more control
tests working for you look familiar
the woman here in the green top you are
a zero contract worker you and I've got
a slightly different reason for keeping
my hand up I'm a head teacher of a very
large school which is very close to here
I think that there are three reasons why
with our school it's worked but it's
worked for the people on zero hour
contracts as well as our school as a
school obviously our budgets are getting
tighter and tighter
we provide wraparound childcare for
children for our families in the local
community and having zero our staff some
staff are not zero hours but having zero
our staff means that we can be
responsive to the childcare needs of our
families if we didn't have that we would
have to turn families away for childcare
every single night but when the demand
rises it means that we can give the
families the childcare that it needs
that's one point secondly Sen in schools
so special needs provision in schools is
just not adequately adequately funded
we've got a number of staff who've been
on zero hour contracts and are currently
meeting the needs of children who are
awaiting places in specialist schools
and when those children get those very
desperately needed places we won't need
the staff who are currently holding
those children and meeting their needs
as well as we currently can thirdly
we've got a number of families who their
mums or their dads work on zero hour
contracts and it enables them to work in
and around the needs of when their
children are at school so I do think for
some people it's not the right solution
but I think from our circumstances and
the role I do it's had a very three
three very positive outcomes in the
woman behind you you are in a zero hours
contract program as a young person and
you mentioned young people and how's it
working for you not well I've been on
three different serials contracts in
different cities I've never been able to
make ends meet there's been times I've
turned up at work and being turned away
because I just wasn't needed and it just
seemed to very much be the the benefit
of the employer whether the needed you
or not and it didn't matter
that meant you couldn't pay the bills
[Applause]
contract as well are you myself yes I
have been previously I used to be a
dental nurse for a big local agency and
for being on a zero-hour contract I got
paid more I got to choose if I wanted to
work six days that week or four days the
next week it was flexible for me but it
was up to me to save that extra money
the holiday in sickness not that I ever
was on holiday or sickness and it would
be a shame if we got rid of them if
they're not a way to protect the 0al
workers some way because for me it's not
that that does the harm it's the lack of
opportunity or the lack of hope that
gets instilled on people that are
working the 18-hour days working in a
van that has that impact but not the
actual contracts themselves Richard well
I mean there is a problem with long
hours and low low pay in the economy but
I don't think zero hours contracts is
the answer to them because it really
does place people more times than not in
what's known in employment law terms as
been in a master-servant relationship
and this idea that you've somehow got
the freedom to take it or leave it is
actually a false depiction of what
really goes on out there in the real
world or to provide services that a
school needs for their but the most
young people's entry point into the
labor market these days is through zero
hours contracts you speak to any young
people working in hospitality working in
the food industry you will find even
working in factories you will find that
more often than not they are employed on
zero hours contracts and what that means
for them is that they can't they can't
take out a rental agreement to get their
own accommodation they certainly can't
take out our mortgage they can be in and
out of a benefit system which is
inflexible and won't allow them to sign
on to universal credit without waiting
six weeks before they get paid it so it
puts them in an extremely precarious
situation and I'm sure that there are
some people who choose to work in that
kind of environment but I tell you the
vast vast majority of people in my
experience
do not choose to be on 0 hours contacts
to the rather have predictability
consciousness well I take some of the
points made by Richard and Ken I think
this is the changing nature of work and
legislation and governments have yet to
catch up with it now I agree there are
problems with rental agreements with
mortgages and so on but I think the
reason this has happened is because of
the change in nature of work it's also
because of digitalization people are on
the move people wanting to work at odd
times people not necessarily wanting to
go to an office and I thought actually
there a response from the audience it
was absolutely fascinating because they
were divided but actually there were
several people the majority I think who
spoke up in favor more or less of zero
hours contract mean they just happen to
be the ones I know but I actually think
it was very very interesting and I think
there are young people there are
students there are older workers for
whom this actually fits and I think
we've got to find a way of dealing with
some of the points Richard mention
interestingly actually the EU has been
an obstacle as far as Johnson is pointed
out to dealing with the problem of
agency workers and dealing with agency
workers I think is a very necessary
thing to do and once we're outside the
EU we will actually be able to deal with
it but I don't think we want to check
the baby out with the bathwater there
are good things in flexible working as
well as some challenges at the same time
okay I'll come back to came over but
just let Caroline get a word in here so
when you hear some people say it the
Greek economy works for them or as we
heard they had miss assessing it enabled
her to provide services to parents she
wouldn't otherwise be able to do i I
think flexibility in the workplace is
absolutely vital I mean I I was on my
own with two children for eight or nine
years and it was it was crucial for me
to be able to work during school hours
and have more time off in school
holidays when I had to look after the
children quite often I worked from 9
o'clock at night till 3:00 in the
morning when the children were asleep
you know I think people need work that
fits around their lifestyles and
everybody has different needs but my
concern about the
economy is that when the economy starts
to contract the people who are in these
jobs are the first people to feel the
pinch and and it is very much up to the
employer to be able to say no we don't
need you today don't you know so you can
just go home and and you know I've heard
stories about people who pay a lot of
money in the southeast to travel all the
way into London to get to work and are
then told to turn around and go back
home and they don't know money that day
and they might have spent ten pounds on
the fare and I think Richards absolutely
right that it's a master-servant
relationship and people can be very very
vulnerable and and we need to protect
these people and and without wanting to
sound like a broken record I know that
one of the things that youyou offers is
is rights for workers
you know rights for so an employer so
you have to have an 11:00 hour break
between shifts your employer can't
expect you to work till midnight and
then call you back in at 6:00 in the
morning
so you have time off for sick leave if
you have time off the holidays and and
like that kind of thing is really
important and I don't want us to go down
a road where it's a race to the bottom
and and it's just cheap labor and
employers can just call shots and and
people are completely at their mercy it
can very briefly I think I think Lex
ability is fine provided its equal if
the working phone in and say look I'm
sorry I can't come in today and there's
no problem well that's fine
I'd like to know what you would say
Norman and what you would say to the
widow of Don Lane Don Lane was a 53 year
old van driver he would diabetic he had
an appointment with a specialist at
hospital he went he was fined 150 pounds
a day because he didn't provide the
replacement driver and he cause he lost
his money and he had to pay for the van
that he was renting or hiring he had
further appointments and he couldn't go
he decided not to go because he'd be in
debt he didn't have the resources
he didn't go he missed one appointment
he started to get ill he missed a second
appointment his his workmates were
worried about him he missed his third
appointment he collapsed and died and he
was 53 and he was a precarious worker
driving one of the vans the white vans
now you tell me that to justified you
tell me that's right that a worker is so
terrified to have a day off her sickness
because he will be fined and therefore
he dies you tell me that's right that's
the gig economy that's what he's doing
to working people
[Applause]
[Music]